AspNetCoreOData 8x Query options docs (#273)
MicrosoftDocs/OData-docs: Odata-docs/webapi-8/fundamentals/query-options.md

---
title: "OData query Options"
description: "This documentation describes how to use the supported query options."

author: KenitoInc
ms.author: kemunga

ms.date: 12/16/2022
---

> # OData query options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# OData Query Options
```
H1 normally use title case

> # OData query options

Reviewer: Your doc is being flagged for having a H1 that is conflicting with other docs. You could fix that by renaming this to **OData Query Options in ASP.NET Core OData 8** or **Working with OData Query Options in ASP.NET Core OData 8**. If you make the change, be sure to change the **title** field at the top too

**Applies To**:[!INCLUDE[appliesto-webapi](../../includes/appliesto-webapi-v8.md)]

AspNetCore OData 8.x provides out of the box querying capabilities.

A query option is basically requesting that a service perform a set of transformations such as filtering, sorting, etc. to its data before returning the results. See more information [here](/odata/concepts/queryoptions-overview).

## Model class
We will define our model as follows:

```csharp
public class Customer
{
    [Key]
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public String Name { get; set; }
    public int Age { get; set; }
    public List<Order> Orders { get; set; }
}

public class Order
{
    [Key]
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public int Price { get; set; }
    public int Quantity { get; set; }
}
```

We have a `Customer` entity with `Orders` navigation property.

## Configuring Startup class
```csharp
public class Startup
{
    public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
    {
        var modelBuilder = new ODataConventionModelBuilder();
        modelBuilder.EntitySet<Customer>("Customers");

        services.AddControllers().AddOData(

>             options => options.Select().Filter().OrderBy().Expand().Count().SetMaxTop(null).AddRouteComponents(

Reviewer: One OData query feature that get forgotten a lot is skip token - `SkipToken()`. I think you should talk a little about it. It might even deserve a doc of it's own

Author: I deliberately left it since we will have a separate pagination doc

                "odata",
                modelBuilder.GetEdmModel()));
    }
}
```

In the above configuration, `options` is an instance of `ODataOptions`.
`Select()` enables `$select` query option.
`Filter()` enables `$filter` query option.
`OrderBy()` enables `$orderby` query option.
`Expand()` enables `$expand` query option.
`Count()` enables `$count` query option.
`SetMaxTop()` sets the maximum value of `$top` that a client can request.

## Controller

```csharp
public class CustomersController : ODataController
{
    [EnableQuery]
    public IActionResult Get()
    {

>         return Ok(context.Customers);

Reviewer: I don't know if you wanted to include code snippets that can actually compile but this definitely wouldn't because `context` is undefined. Something that would take very little effort to do is define a static `List<Customer>` field in your controller and populate it with say 3 customer objects and use it as your data source. That way the code would compile if someone who's going through the doc decided to try-it-out.

Author: Fixed

    }
}
```

In the controller method, we add the `EnableQuery` attribute.

> The `EnableQuery` attribute is an action filter that parses, validates, and applies the query. The filter converts the query options into a LINQ expression. When the controller returns an `IQueryable` or `IActionFilter` type, the Linq provider converts the Linq expression into a query e.g EfCore will convert the Linq expression to a Sql statement. 

Reviewer 2: Did you mean `IEnumerable` instead of `IActionFilter`? Maybe it might be worth mention that you can also return a Task<IEnumerable|IQueryable> or ActionResult.

Author: Actually I meant `IActionResult`.
#Fixed

## Basic queries
We can select a specific property or properties in an entity.

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers?$select=Name
```

```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:6285/odata/$metadata#Customers(Name)",
    "value": [
        {
            "Name": "Customer 1"
        },
        {
            "Name": "Customer 2"
        },
        {
            "Name": "Customer 3"
        },
        {
            "Name": "Customer 4"
        },
        {
            "Name": "Customer 5"
        }
    ]
}
```

We can return `Customers` with their related `Orders`. In this case we use `$expand`.

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers?$expand=Orders
```

> ```json

Reviewer: To keep the size of you doc manageable, consider having 3 objects in your data source. They should be enough to help you demonstrate application of OData query options

    }
}
```

In the controller method above, we only allow `$filter` query option. If we use another query option e.g `$select`, we will get an error.

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers?$select=Name
```

```json
{
    "error": {
        "code": "",
        "message": "The query specified in the URI is not valid. Query option 'Select' is not allowed. To allow it, set the 'AllowedQueryOptions' property on EnableQueryAttribute or QueryValidationSettings.",
        "details": [],
        "innererror": {}
    }
}
```

We can combine multiple query options as shown below:

```csharp
[EnableQuery(AllowedQueryOptions = AllowedQueryOptions.Filter | AllowedQueryOptions.OrderBy)]
public IQueryable<Customer> Get()
{
    return db.Customers.AsQueryable<Customer>();
}
```

## Invoking query options directly
There are scenarios where we are unable to use `EnableQuery` attribute e.g When inside the controller method, we are getting data from multiple sources and we would want that data to be processed before it's returned to the controller method.

We use the `ODataQueryOptions.ApplyTo` method to apply the required query options.

### SelectExpand query
```csharp

> public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)

Reviewer: What about the simple case of:
```
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{
    return options.ApplyTo(db.Customers.AsQueryable());
}
```

{

>     options.Request.ODataFeature().SelectExpandClause = new SelectExpandQueryOption(null, "Orders", options.Context,

Author: I have updated the doc and added both examples

                    "Quantity": 2
                }
            ]
        },
        ...
        ...
        ...
    ]
}
```

### Filter query
```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{
    var filter = new FilterQueryOption("Id eq 1", options.Context,
        new ODataQueryOptionParser(
            options.Context.Model,
            options.Context.NavigationSource.EntityType(),
            options.Context.NavigationSource,
            new Dictionary<string, string> { { "$filter", "Id eq 1" } },
            options.Context.RequestContainer));

    IQueryable results = filter.ApplyTo(db.Customers.AsQueryable(), new ODataQuerySettings());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

We create a `FilterQueryOption` and the call `ApplyTo` to apply the filter query to the data.

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers
```

```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:6285/odata/$metadata#Customers",
    "value": [
        {
            "Id": 1,
            "Name": "Customer 1",
            "Age": 31
        }
    ]
}
```

### Apply query
```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{

>     var queryOptionParser = new ODataQueryOptionParser(

Reviewer 2: Can this be simplified to `options.Apply.ApplyTo(...)`?

            options.Context.Model,
            options.Context.NavigationSource.EntityType(),
            options.Context.NavigationSource,
            new Dictionary<string, string> { { "$apply", "aggregate(Age with max as MaxAge)" } },
            options.Context.RequestContainer);

    options.Request.ODataFeature().ApplyClause = new ApplyQueryOption("aggregate(Age with max as MaxAge)", options.Context, queryOptionParser).ApplyClause;

    IQueryable results = options.ApplyTo(db.Customers.AsQueryable());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

## Extending the EnableQueryAttribute class
The `EnableQueryAttribute` class is NOT sealed. This means it can be extended.

`EnableQueryAttribute` class has several virtual methods that can be overriden.

> - `ValidateQuery` which performs query validation before query execution. In this method, we call each query options' `Validate` method and use the appropriate validator class to perform validation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `ValidateQuery` which performs query validation before query execution. In this method, we call each query option's `Validate` method and use the appropriate validator class to perform validation.
```

- `Parameter aliases` - Parameter aliases can be used in place of literal values in entity keys, function parameters, or within a $compute, $filter or $orderby expression. Example `http://host/service.svc/Employees?$filter=Region eq @p1&@p1='WA'`.
- `Custom Query Options` - Custom query options not defined in the OData specification. They are defined by the users. They MUST NOT begin with the `$` or `@` character and MUST NOT conflict with any OData-defined system query options. Example `http://host/service/Products?debug-mode=true`.

See more information on the types of query options [here](/odata/concepts/queryoptions-overview).

This tutorial demonstrates how to use query options in AspNetCore OData 8.x.

## Model class
We will define our model as follows:

```csharp
public class Customer
{
    [Key]
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public String Name { get; set; }
    public int Age { get; set; }
    public List<Order> Orders { get; set; }
}

public class Order
{
    [Key]
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public int Price { get; set; }
    public int Quantity { get; set; }
}
```

> We have a `Customer` entity with `Orders` navigation property.

Reviewer 3: @KenitoInc to a beginner it may be unclear how Orders property on the Customer class maps to OData EDM navigation property concept. 
Consider a brief explanation of the mapping and a link to a Data Modelling doc.

```csharp
// Program.cs
var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var modelBuilder = new ODataConventionModelBuilder();
modelBuilder.EntitySet<Customer>("Customers");

builder.Services.AddControllers().AddOData(
    options => options.Select().Filter().OrderBy().Expand().Count().SetMaxTop(null).AddRouteComponents(
        routePrefix: "odata",
        model: modelBuilder.GetEdmModel()));

var app = builder.Build();
```

# [.NET Core 3.1](#tab/netcoreapp31)

```csharp
// Startup.cs
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
{
    var modelBuilder = new ODataConventionModelBuilder();
    modelBuilder.EntitySet<Customer>("Customers");

    services.AddControllers().AddOData(
            options => options.Select().Filter().OrderBy().Expand().Count().SetMaxTop(null).AddRouteComponents(
                "odata",
                modelBuilder.GetEdmModel()));
}
```

---

In the above configuration, `options` is an instance of `ODataOptions`.
- `Select()` enables `$select` query option.
- `Filter()` enables `$filter` query option.
- `OrderBy()` enables `$orderby` query option.
- `Expand()` enables `$expand` query option.
- `Count()` enables `$count` query option.

> - `SetMaxTop()` sets the maximum value of `$top` that a client can request.

Reviewer 3: @KenitoInc consider a link to the paging concepts doc

Author: We can update the link later once the pagination doc is published

                    "Quantity": 15
                }
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

We can combine various query options.
In the request below:
- Select only the `Name` property from `Customer` entity.
- Expand the related `Orders`.
- Filter the `Orders` and return only the ones whose `Id` is greater than `1004`.
- Order the `Customers` by `Name` in descending order.

```http
http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers?$select=Name&$expand=Orders($filter=Id gt 1004)&$orderby=Name desc
```

```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:6285/odata/$metadata#Customers(Name,Orders())",
    "value": [
        {
            "Name": "Customer 3",
            "Orders": [
                {
                    "Id": 1006,
                    "Price": 15,
                    "Quantity": 50
                },
                {
                    "Id": 1005,
                    "Price": 40,
                    "Quantity": 15
                }
            ]
        },
        {
            "Name": "Customer 2",
            "Orders": []
        },
        {
            "Name": "Customer 1",
            "Orders": []
        }
    ]
}
```

### Limiting Query Options

> We can limit the type of query option that can be used while calling a certain API action.

Reviewer 3: @KenitoInc a common source of confusion from customers query options is how AllowedQueryOptions interacts with config options. e.g. if a user doesn't explicitly specify options=>.filter() can I activate with AllowedQueryOptions.Filter

An example issue here https://github.com/OData/AspNetCoreOData/issues/667

There are scenarios where we may be unable to use `EnableQuery` attribute. For example, if our controller fetches data from multiple data sources and not just a single `IQueryable`, we may want to control how the query options are applied and process the data before it's returned by the controller.

We use the [ODataQueryOptions.ApplyTo](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnet.odata.query.odataqueryoptions.applyto) method to apply the required query options.

[ODataQueryOptions<`TEntity`>](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnet.odata.query.odataqueryoptions-1) can be used an argument in a controller method.

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{
    IQueryable results = options.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

In the example above, the [ApplyTo](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnet.odata.query.odataqueryoptions.applyto) method applies to all query options.

We call ApplyTo for each individual query as shown in the sub-sections below.

### SelectExpand query
We call `ApplyTo` on the `SelectExpand` property as follows:

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{

>     IQueryable results = options.SelectExpand.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable(), new ODataQuerySettings());

Author: The overload is not in `SelectExpandQueryOption`.

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

`SelectExpand` handles both `$select` and `$expand` query options.

The `options.SelectExpand` property is an instance of `SelectExpandQueryOption`. It will be set when we make the request below:

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers?$expand=Orders
```

> If we don't want to pass the query option in the request, but we want the `Orders` property to be expanded, we can initialize the `SelectExpandQueryOption` and set it in the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we don't want to pass the query option in the request URL, but we want the `Orders` property to be expanded, we can initialize the `SelectExpandQueryOption` and set it in the request.
```

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{

>     options.Request.ODataFeature().SelectExpandClause = new SelectExpandQueryOption(null, "Orders", options.Context,

Reviewer: @KenitoInc Food for thought and obviously not a deal breaker... One thing I have found to be useful with code snippets is named parameters. Since the reader doesn't have the library reference when reading the doc, it helps answer some of the questions they might have about the shared code. Like in your case, it'll not be immediately obvious what `null` represents. But if named parameters were used, it'd be self-documenting:
```csharp
options.Request.ODataFeature().SelectExpandClause = new SelectExpandQueryOption(
    select: null,
    expand: "Orders",
    context: options.Context,
    queryOptionParser: new ODataQueryOptionParser(
        model: options.Context.Model,
        targetEdmType: options.Context.NavigationSource.EntityType(),
        targetNavigationSource: options.Context.NavigationSource,
        queryOptions: new Dictionary<string, string> { { "$expand", "Orders" } },
        container: options.Context.RequestContainer)).SelectExpandClause;
```

        new ODataQueryOptionParser(
            options.Context.Model,
            options.Context.NavigationSource.EntityType(),
            options.Context.NavigationSource,
            new Dictionary<string, string> { { "$expand", "Orders" } },
            options.Context.RequestContainer)).SelectExpandClause;

    IQueryable results = options.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

> When making the request, we don't need to use the `$expand` query option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When making the request, we don't need to include the `$expand` query option.
```
I think "include" is a better word in this context...

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers
```

Below will be the output:

```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:6285/odata/$metadata#Customers(Orders())",
    "value": [
        {
            "Id": 1,
            "Name": "Customer 1",
            "Age": 31,
            "Orders": [
                {
                    "Id": 1001,
                    "Price": 10,
                    "Quantity": 10
                },
                {
                    "Id": 1002,
                    "Price": 35,
                    "Quantity": 2
                }
            ]
        },
        ...
        ...
    ]
}
```

### Filter query

> We call `ApplyTo` on the `Filter` property as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can call `ApplyTo` on the `Filter` property of `ODataQueryOptions` class as follows:
```

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{

>     IQueryable results = options.Filter.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable(), new ODataQuerySettings());

Reviewer: Refer to my other comment on overload of `ApplyTo` that doesn't expect an `ODataQuerySettings` argument

Author: The overload is not in `FilterQueryOption`.

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

The `options.Filter` property is an instance of `FilterQueryOption`. It will be set when we make the request below:

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers?$filter=Id eq 1
```

> If we don't want to pass the filter query option in the request, but we want a filter to be applied, we can initialize the `FilterQueryOption` and call `ApplyTo` to apply the filter query to the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we don't want to pass the filter query option in the request URL, but we want a filter to be applied, we can initialize the `FilterQueryOption` and call `ApplyTo` to apply the filter query to the data.
```

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{

>     var filter = new FilterQueryOption("Id eq 1", options.Context,

Reviewer: Refer to my other comment about named parameters

        new ODataQueryOptionParser(
            options.Context.Model,
            options.Context.NavigationSource.EntityType(),
            options.Context.NavigationSource,
            new Dictionary<string, string> { { "$filter", "Id eq 1" } },
            options.Context.RequestContainer));

    IQueryable results = filter.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable(), new ODataQuerySettings());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

> When making the request, we don't need to use the `$filter` query option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When making the request, we don't need to include the `$filter` query option.
```

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers
```

Below will be the output:

```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:6285/odata/$metadata#Customers",
    "value": [
        {
            "Id": 1,
            "Name": "Customer 1",
            "Age": 31
        }
    ]
}
```

### Apply query

> Apply query feature is applied in grouping and aggregating data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `$apply` query option is used in grouping and aggregating data.
```

> We call `ApplyTo` on the `Apply` property as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can call `ApplyTo` on the `Apply` property of `ODataQueryOptions` class as follows:
```

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{

>     IQueryable results = options.Apply.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable(), new ODataQuerySettings());

Reviewer: Refer to my other comment on overload of `ApplyTo` that doesn't expect an `ODataQuerySettings` argument

Author: The overload is not in `ApplyQueryOption`

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

The `options.Apply` property is an instance of `ApplyQueryOption`. It will be set when we make the request below:

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers?$apply=aggregate(Age with max as MaxAge)
```

If we don't want to pass the query option in the request, but we want to aggregate the results, we can initialize the `ApplyQueryOption` and set it in the request.

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{
    var queryOptionParser = new ODataQueryOptionParser(
            options.Context.Model,
            options.Context.NavigationSource.EntityType(),
            options.Context.NavigationSource,
            new Dictionary<string, string> { { "$apply", "aggregate(Age with max as MaxAge)" } },
            options.Context.RequestContainer);

>     options.Request.ODataFeature().ApplyClause = new ApplyQueryOption("aggregate(Age with max as MaxAge)", options.Context, queryOptionParser).ApplyClause;

Reviewer: Refer to my other comment about named parameters

>     options.Request.ODataFeature().ApplyClause = new ApplyQueryOption("aggregate(Age with max as MaxAge)", options.Context, queryOptionParser).ApplyClause;

Reviewer: Not a deal breaker but the 3 code snippets provided for initializing and setting the query option on the request directly are not uniform... This one has a `queryOptionParser` variable... Then for the filter query, you don't set `FilterClause` while for `SelectExpand` and `Apply` queries you set `SelectExpandClause` and `ApplyClause` respectfully. Making them uniform could probably make it easy to relate one with the other in a small way.

Author: ODataFeature only has `SelectExpandClause` and `ApplyClause` but no `FilterClause`.

- `ApplyQuery` - triggers `queryOption.ApplyTo()`.
- `GetModel` - returns an `IEdmModel`.

```csharp
public class CustomEnableQueryAttribute : EnableQueryAttribute
{
    public override void ValidateQuery(HttpRequestMessage request, ODataQueryOptions queryOptions)
    {
        if (queryOptions.Filter != null)
        {
            queryOptions.Filter.Validator = new MyFilterValidator();
        }
        base.ValidateQuery(request, queryOptions);
    }
}

public class MyFilterValidator : FilterQueryValidator
{
    public override void Validate(FilterQueryOption filterOption, ODataValidationSettings validationSettings)
    {
        ValidateRangeVariable(filterOption.FilterClause.RangeVariable, validationSettings);

        base.Validate(filterOption, validationSettings);
    }

    public override void ValidateRangeVariable(RangeVariable rangeVariable, ODataValidationSettings settings)
    {
        // Add your custom logic to Validate RangeVariable
    }
}
```

The `CustomEnableQuery` attribute can be applied to a controller action as follows:

```csharp
[CustomEnableQuery]
public IQueryable<Customer> Get()
{
    return Customers.AsQueryable<Customer>();
}
```

> We will only use the `MyFilterValidator` in `$filter` queries. In other queries, we will use the default validators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `MyFilterValidator` will only be used in `$filter` queries. In other queries, the default validators will be used.
```

---
title: "OData Query Options in ASP.NET Core OData 8"
description: "This documentation describes how to use the supported query options."

author: KenitoInc
ms.author: kemunga

ms.date: 12/16/2022
---
# OData Query Options in ASP.NET Core OData 8
**Applies To**:[!INCLUDE[appliesto-webapi](../../includes/appliesto-webapi-v8.md)]

AspNetCore OData 8.x provides out of the box querying capabilities.

A query option is basically requesting that a service perform a set of transformations such as filtering, sorting, etc. to its data before returning the results. 

There are various types of query options.

> - `System Query Options` - Query options that are defined by OData. System query options are prefixed with the dollar ($) character, which is optional in OData 4.01. Example is `$filter`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `System query options` - Query options that are defined by OData. System query options are prefixed with the dollar ($) character, which is optional in OData 4.01. Example is `$filter`.
```

- `Parameter aliases` - Parameter aliases can be used in place of literal values in entity keys, function parameters, or within a $compute, $filter or $orderby expression. Example `http://host/service.svc/Employees?$filter=Region eq @p1&@p1='WA'`.

> - `Custom Query Options` - Custom query options not defined in the OData specification. They are defined by the users. They MUST NOT begin with the `$` or `@` character and MUST NOT conflict with any OData-defined system query options. Example `http://host/service/Products?debug-mode=true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Custom Query Options` - Custom query options are not defined in the OData specification. They are defined by the users. They MUST NOT begin with the `$` or `@` character and MUST NOT conflict with any OData-defined system query options. Example `http://host/service/Products?debug-mode=true`.
```

> - `Custom Query Options` - Custom query options not defined in the OData specification. They are defined by the users. They MUST NOT begin with the `$` or `@` character and MUST NOT conflict with any OData-defined system query options. Example `http://host/service/Products?debug-mode=true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Custom query options` - Custom query options not defined in the OData specification. They are defined by the users. They MUST NOT begin with the `$` or `@` character and MUST NOT conflict with any OData-defined system query options. Example `http://host/service/Products?debug-mode=true`.
```

See more information on the types of query options [here](/odata/concepts/queryoptions-overview).

> This tutorial demonstrates how to use query options in AspNetCore OData 8.x.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates how to use query options in ASP.NET Core OData 8.x.
```

> ## Model class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Model classes OR Data model
```

## Registering OData services

# [.NET 6.0](#tab/net60)

```csharp
// Program.cs
var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var modelBuilder = new ODataConventionModelBuilder();
modelBuilder.EntitySet<Customer>("Customers");

builder.Services.AddControllers().AddOData(
    options => options.Select().Filter().OrderBy().Expand().Count().SetMaxTop(null).AddRouteComponents(
        routePrefix: "odata",
        model: modelBuilder.GetEdmModel()));

var app = builder.Build();
```

# [.NET Core 3.1](#tab/netcoreapp31)

```csharp
// Startup.cs
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
{
    var modelBuilder = new ODataConventionModelBuilder();
    modelBuilder.EntitySet<Customer>("Customers");

    services.AddControllers().AddOData(
            options => options.Select().Filter().OrderBy().Expand().Count().SetMaxTop(null).AddRouteComponents(
                "odata",
                modelBuilder.GetEdmModel()));
}
```

---

In the above configuration, `options` is an instance of `ODataOptions`.

> - `Select()` enables `$select` query option.

Reviewer 2: Consider linking these methods to their reference docs the first they're mentioned, e.g. [`Select()`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.odata.odataoptions.select)

- `Filter()` enables `$filter` query option.
- `OrderBy()` enables `$orderby` query option.
- `Expand()` enables `$expand` query option.
- `Count()` enables `$count` query option.
- `SetMaxTop()` sets the maximum value of `$top` that a client can request. Read more in the [client-driven paging documentation](/odata/webapi-8/fundamentals/client-driven-paging)

> 

Reviewer 2: Might be worthwhile to mention the `EnableQueryFeatures()` shorthand method for enabling all of them at a go.

## Controller

```csharp
public class CustomersController : ODataController
{

>     private static List<Order> Orders = new List<Order>
>         {
>             new Order { Id = "1001", Price = 10, Quantity = 10 },
>             new Order { Id = "1002", Price = 35, Quantity = 2 },
>             new Order { Id = "1003", Price = 70, Quantity = 5 },
>             new Order { Id = "1004", Price = 20, Quantity = 20 },
>             new Order { Id = "1005", Price = 40, Quantity = 15 },
>             new Order { Id = "1006", Price = 15, Quantity = 50 },
>         };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    private static List<Order> Orders = new List<Order>
    {
        new Order { Id = "1001", Price = 10, Quantity = 10 },
        new Order { Id = "1002", Price = 35, Quantity = 2 },
        new Order { Id = "1003", Price = 70, Quantity = 5 },
        new Order { Id = "1004", Price = 20, Quantity = 20 },
        new Order { Id = "1005", Price = 40, Quantity = 15 },
        new Order { Id = "1006", Price = 15, Quantity = 50 },
    };
```

>     private static List<Customer> Customers = new List<Customer>
>         {
>             new Customer { Id = 1, Name = "Customer 1", Age = 31, Orders = new List<Order>(){Orders[0], Orders[1]} },
>             new Customer { Id = 2, Name = "Customer 2", Age = 32, Orders = new List<Order>(){Orders[2], Orders[3]} },
>             new Customer { Id = 3, Name = "Customer 3", Age = 33, Orders = new List<Order>(){Orders[4], Orders[5]} }
>         };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    private static List<Customer> Customers = new List<Customer>
    {
        new Customer { Id = 1, Name = "Customer 1", Age = 31, Orders = new List<Order>(){Orders[0], Orders[1]} },
        new Customer { Id = 2, Name = "Customer 2", Age = 32, Orders = new List<Order>(){Orders[2], Orders[3]} },
        new Customer { Id = 3, Name = "Customer 3", Age = 33, Orders = new List<Order>(){Orders[4], Orders[5]} }
    };
```

    [EnableQuery]
    public IActionResult Get()
    {
        return Ok(Customers);
    }
}
```

In the controller method, we add the `EnableQuery` attribute.

> The `EnableQuery` attribute is an action filter that parses, validates, and applies the query. The filter converts the query options into a LINQ expression. When the controller returns an `IQueryable` or `IActionResult` type, the Linq provider converts the Linq expression into a query e.g EfCore will convert the Linq expression to a Sql statement. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `EnableQuery` attribute is an action filter that parses, validates, and applies the query. The filter converts the query options into a LINQ expression. When the controller returns an `IQueryable` or `IActionResult` type, the Linq provider converts the Linq expression into a query e.g Entity Framework (EF) Core will convert the Linq expression to a Sql statement. 
```

## Basic queries

> We can select a specific property or properties in an entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can select a specific property or properties in an entity:
```

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers?$select=Name
```

```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:6285/odata/$metadata#Customers(Name)",
    "value": [
        {
            "Name": "Customer 1"
        },
        {
            "Name": "Customer 2"
        },
        {
            "Name": "Customer 3"
        }
    ]
}
```

> We can return `Customers` with their related `Orders`. In this case we use `$expand`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can return `Customers` with their related `Orders`. In this case we use `$expand`:
```

                    "Price": 40,
                    "Quantity": 15
                }
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

We can combine various query options.
In the request below:
- Select only the `Name` property from `Customer` entity.
- Expand the related `Orders`.
- Filter the `Orders` and return only the ones whose `Id` is greater than `1004`.
- Order the `Customers` by `Name` in descending order.

```http
http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers?$select=Name&$expand=Orders($filter=Id gt 1004)&$orderby=Name desc
```

```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:6285/odata/$metadata#Customers(Name,Orders())",
    "value": [
        {
            "Name": "Customer 3",
            "Orders": [
                {
                    "Id": 1006,
                    "Price": 15,
                    "Quantity": 50
                },
                {
                    "Id": 1005,
                    "Price": 40,
                    "Quantity": 15
                }
            ]
        },
        {
            "Name": "Customer 2",
            "Orders": []
        },
        {
            "Name": "Customer 1",
            "Orders": []
        }
    ]
}
```

> ### Limiting Query Options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Limiting query options
```
To maintain consistency with "Basic queries"

We can limit the type of query option that can be used while calling a certain API action.

```csharp
public class CustomersController : ODataController
{
    [EnableQuery(AllowedQueryOptions = AllowedQueryOptions.Filter)]
    public IActionResult Get()
    {
        return Ok(Customers);
    }
}
```

In the controller method above, we only allow `$filter` query option. If we use another query option e.g `$select`, we will get an error.

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers?$select=Name
```

```json
{
    "error": {
        "code": "",
        "message": "The query specified in the URI is not valid. Query option 'Select' is not allowed. To allow it, set the 'AllowedQueryOptions' property on EnableQueryAttribute or QueryValidationSettings.",
        "details": [],
        "innererror": {}
    }
}
```

We can combine multiple query options as shown below:

```csharp
[EnableQuery(AllowedQueryOptions = AllowedQueryOptions.Filter | AllowedQueryOptions.OrderBy)]
public IQueryable<Customer> Get()
{
    return Customers.AsQueryable<Customer>();
}
```

> ## Config options vs AllowedQueryOptions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configured vs allowed query options
```

When registering OData services, we add query options configurations as shown below:

```csharp
.AddOData(
    options => options.Select().OrderBy().Expand().Count().SetMaxTop(null)
)
```

These are global configurations. If a query option is not enabled here, it cannot be enabled in the controller.

> In the above example, we did not enable the $filter query option. If we configure a controller as shown below, the $filter will not be applied since we had not enabled $filter in the global configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above example, we did not enable the `$filter` query option. If we configure a controller as shown below, the `$filter` will not be applied since we had not enabled `$filter` in the global configuration.
```

```csharp
[EnableQuery(AllowedQueryOptions = AllowedQueryOptions.Filter)]
public IActionResult Get()
{
    return Ok(Customers);
}

> ```

Reviewer: Maybe show the outcome/response if someone tries to use a query options that is not configured but allowed...

> ## Invoking query options directly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Applying query options directly
```

> There are scenarios where we are unable to use `EnableQuery` attribute e.g When inside the controller method, we are getting data from multiple sources and we would want that data to be processed before it's returned to the controller method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are scenarios where we are unable to use `EnableQuery` attribute. For example, if our controller fetches data from multiple data sources and not just a single `IQueryable`, we may want to control how the query options are applied and process the data before it's returned by the controller.
```

> There are scenarios where we are unable to use `EnableQuery` attribute e.g When inside the controller method, we are getting data from multiple sources and we would want that data to be processed before it's returned to the controller method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are scenarios where we may be unable to use `EnableQuery` attribute, e.g., when inside the controller method, or we are getting data from multiple sources and we would want that data to be processed before it's returned from the controller method.
```

> We use the `ODataQueryOptions.ApplyTo` method to apply the required query options.

Reviewer 2: I think you should link these to the `ODataQueryOption` and/or `ApplyTo` reference docs. I think it may also be a good idea to introduce `ODataQueryOption` with a few words since this is the first time it's mentioned, and say that it can be an argument to the controller method.

> ### SelectExpand query

Reviewer: I think this heading would be best suited to the section where you demonstrate how to invoke `SelectExpand` feature directly

> ### SelectExpand query

Reviewer: It'd be helpful to the reader if you mentioned that `SelectExpand` handles both `$select` and `$expand` query options...

```csharp

> public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)

Reviewer: I believe this should be an example for applying query options directly... It'd be applicable to any configured query options, not just `$select` and `$expand` - `options.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable())`.

`options.SelectExpand.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQuerayble())` in the next C# code sample on the other hand is specific to the `SelectExpand` feature.

Author: I have refactored this section to explain that

{
    IQueryable results = options.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

> In the example above, `options.SelectExpand` property will be set when we make the request below:

Reviewer 2: I got a bit confused reading this section. Especially because it mentions`options.SelectExpand` "in the example above" yet it doesn't appear anywhere so for. I think you should first give an example of `options.ApplyTo` on its own and explain that it applies all query options.

Then mention that you can apply query options individually, and then proceed with a section for each query option property like you have done below. Then you don't have to repeat the `options.ApplyTo` for each sub-section.

Below will be the output:

```json
{
    "@odata.context": "http://localhost:6285/odata/$metadata#Customers(Orders())",
    "value": [
        {
            "Id": 1,
            "Name": "Customer 1",
            "Age": 31,
            "Orders": [
                {
                    "Id": 1001,
                    "Price": 10,
                    "Quantity": 10
                },
                {
                    "Id": 1002,
                    "Price": 35,
                    "Quantity": 2
                }
            ]
        },
        ...
        ...
    ]
}
```

Alternatively we can call `ApplyTo` on the `SelectExpand` property as follows:

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{
    IQueryable results = options.SelectExpand.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable(), new ODataQuerySettings());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

If we don't want to pass the query option in the request, but we want the `Orders` property to be expanded, we can initialize the `SelectExpandQueryOption` and set it in the request.

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{

>     options.Request.ODataFeature().SelectExpandClause = new SelectExpandQueryOption(null, "Orders", options.Context,

Reviewer 2: I didn't know this. Good to know. Does this also override/overwrite the request query options if it was already part of the URL?

Author: Yes it will override

        new ODataQueryOptionParser(
            options.Context.Model,
            options.Context.NavigationSource.EntityType(),
            options.Context.NavigationSource,
            new Dictionary<string, string> { { "$expand", "Orders" } },
            options.Context.RequestContainer)).SelectExpandClause;

    IQueryable results = options.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

When making the request, we don't need to use the `$expand` query option.

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers
```

### Filter query
```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{
    IQueryable results = options.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable(), new ODataQuerySettings());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```
In the example above, `options.Filter` property will be set when we make the request below:

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers?$filter=Id eq 1
```
The `options.Filter` property is an instance of `FilterQueryOption`.

> Below will be the output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below will be the output:
```

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{
    IQueryable results = options.Filter.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable(), new ODataQuerySettings());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

If we don't want to pass the filter query option in the request, but we want a filter to be applied, we can initialize the `FilterQueryOption` and call `ApplyTo` to apply the filter query to the data.

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{
    var filter = new FilterQueryOption("Id eq 1", options.Context,
        new ODataQueryOptionParser(
            options.Context.Model,
            options.Context.NavigationSource.EntityType(),
            options.Context.NavigationSource,
            new Dictionary<string, string> { { "$filter", "Id eq 1" } },
            options.Context.RequestContainer));

    IQueryable results = filter.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable(), new ODataQuerySettings());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```
When making the request, we don't need to use the `$expand` query option.

```http
GET http://localhost:6285/odata/Customers
```

> ### Apply query

Reviewer: Because this is the first place you bring up the `Apply` query feature, maybe you should mention it's applied in grouping and aggregating data...

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{
    IQueryable results = options.Apply.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable(), new ODataQuerySettings());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

If we don't want to pass the query option in the request, but we want to aggregate the results, we can initialize the `ApplyQueryOption` and set it in the request.

```csharp
public IQueryable<Customer> Get(ODataQueryOptions<Customer> options)
{
    var queryOptionParser = new ODataQueryOptionParser(
            options.Context.Model,
            options.Context.NavigationSource.EntityType(),
            options.Context.NavigationSource,
            new Dictionary<string, string> { { "$apply", "aggregate(Age with max as MaxAge)" } },
            options.Context.RequestContainer);

    options.Request.ODataFeature().ApplyClause = new ApplyQueryOption("aggregate(Age with max as MaxAge)", options.Context, queryOptionParser).ApplyClause;

    IQueryable results = options.ApplyTo(Customers.AsQueryable());

    return results as IQueryable<Customer>;
}
```

## Extending the EnableQueryAttribute class

> The `EnableQueryAttribute` class is NOT sealed. This means it can be extended.

Reviewer 2: nitpick: I don't think it's necessary to say that the class is NOT sealed. I think it suffices to say that the class can be extended.

> `EnableQueryAttribute` class has several virtual methods that can be overriden.

Reviewer: You could alternatively use the doc comments on the respective methods in `EnableQueryAttribute` class to describe what it does...

> `EnableQueryAttribute` class has several virtual methods that can be overriden.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`EnableQueryAttribute` class has several public virtual methods that can be overridden.
```

> - `ValidateQuery` which performs query validation before query execution. In this method, we call each query option's `Validate` method and use the appropriate validator class to perform validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ValidateQuery` - performs query validation before query execution. In this method, we call each query option's `Validate` method and use the appropriate validator class to perform validation.
```
To keep it consistent with the following 2 bullet points

> - `ApplyQuery` - we call `queryOption.ApplyTo()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ApplyQuery` - triggers `queryOptions.ApplyTo()`.
```

- `GetModel` - returns an `IEdmModel`.

```csharp
public class CustomEnableQueryAttribute : EnableQueryAttribute
{
    public override void ValidateQuery(HttpRequestMessage request, ODataQueryOptions queryOptions)
    {
        if (queryOptions.Filter != null)
        {
            queryOptions.Filter.Validator = new MyFilterValidator();
        }
        base.ValidateQuery(request, queryOptions);
    }
}

public class MyFilterValidator : FilterQueryValidator
{
    public override void Validate(FilterQueryOption filterOption, ODataValidationSettings validationSettings)
    {
        ValidateRangeVariable(filterOption.FilterClause.RangeVariable, validationSettings);

        base.Validate(filterOption, validationSettings);
    }

    public override void ValidateRangeVariable(RangeVariable rangeVariable, ODataValidationSettings settings)
    {
        // Add your custom logic to Validate RangeVariable
    }
}
```

> In the controller method, we add `CustomEnableQuery` attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `CustomEnableQuery` attribute can be applied to a controller action as follows:
```
